Updating docs for unique key changes in 1.1 (#1298)
fishtown-analytics/docs.getdbt.com: website/docs/docs/building-a-dbt-project/building-models/configuring-incremental-models.md

:::tip Optimizing your incremental model

For more complex incremental models that make use of Common Table Expressions (CTEs), you should consider the impact of the position of the `is_incremental()` macro on query performance. In some warehouses, filtering your records early can vastly improve the run time of your query!

:::

### Defining a uniqueness constraint (optional)

> A `unique_key` is an optional parameter for incremental models that specifies a field that should be unique within your model. You can define `unique_key` in a configuration block at the top of your model.

Reviewer: Given the change in v1.1, how about something like:
```suggestion
A `unique_key` is an optional parameter for incremental models, that specifies a field (or combination of fields) that can uniquely identify each row within your model. You can define `unique_key` in a configuration block at the top of your model.
```
We may want to `VersionBlock` that language, and keep the previous language for older versions

Author: Addressed in https://github.com/dbt-labs/docs.getdbt.com/pull/1298/commits/0de7fe73136f06ff9b94ba4152a38897c6e407dd so I could add versioning as well.

For a given row in a `source` table: 
* if all unique_key identified columns are present in the target table, an update procedure takes place

> * if any one of the unique_key columns in a source row does not find a matching target table row, the entire row is inserted into the target table

Reviewer: > an update procedure takes place

This differs based on whether the database uses `merge` or `delete+insert`. If the latter, it's not an `update` of the existing row, it's a `delete` of the existing row + insertion of the new row (with the same key)

I think we need to balance the simplicity of the presentation here, while also finding ways to explain nuances like:
- `unique_key` is used by the most common incremental strategies (`delete+insert` + `merge`), but not all. For instance, it's not used by the `insert_overwrite` strategy. We talk about incremental strategies further down; I recently put together [an explainer in our internal Notion](https://www.notion.so/dbtlabs/Incremental-Strategies-573356fb7b2344fe86d3dd3089b8e2b1).
- If `unique_key` is not specified, the behavior is simple "append-only": all rows returned by the model's SQL are inserted into the preexisting table, with no regard for whether they represent dupes. (In `dbt-spark`, this strategy is named `append` explicitly; in other adapters, this is just the behavior of `delete+insert` or `merge` when no `unique_key` is specified.

Author: @jtcohen6 I think I've addressed these concerns in this commit https://github.com/dbt-labs/docs.getdbt.com/pull/1298/commits/1d3548ebe3c5843b1fb3bface03ba33366d8c54a but please let me know if it needs more tweaking!

> Ideally, you would use incremental models when you want a row or rows in a database to only be represented by a single-source-of-truth row in the target table.

Reviewer: I find this sentence a bit confusing. Maybe something more like:
```suggestion
By using `unique_key`, you can ensure that each row from the source table is represented by a single row in your incremental model, without duplicates
```
```

The `unique_key` should be supplied in your model definition as a string representing a simple column or a list of single quoted column names that can be used together, for example, `[‘col1, ‘col2’, …])`. We recommend you create a list of column in your model.
 
:::info

> While some databases support using expressions (eg. `concat(user_id, session_number)`), this syntax is not universally supported, so is not recommended.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While some databases support using expressions (eg. `concat(user_id, session_number)`), this syntax is not universally supported. We recommend you pass these columns as a list instead: `unique_key = ['user_id', 'session_number']`.
```
```

:::tip Optimizing your incremental model

For more complex incremental models that make use of Common Table Expressions (CTEs), you should consider the impact of the position of the `is_incremental()` macro on query performance. In some warehouses, filtering your records early can vastly improve the run time of your query!

:::

### Defining a uniqueness constraint (optional)

A `unique_key` determines whether a record has new values and should be updated. By using `unique_key`, you can ensure that each row from the source table is represented by a single row in your incremental model, without duplicates. Not specifying a `unique_key` will result in append-only behavior, which means dbt inserts all rows returned by the model's SQL into the preexisting target table without regard for whether the rows represent duplicates.

<VersionBlock firstVersion="0.20" lastVersion="1.0">

> This optional parameter for incremental models specifies a field that can uniquely identify each row within your model. You can define `unique_key` in a configuration block at the top of your model. If your model doesn't contain a single field that is unique, you should consider creating `unique_key` in your model definition.

Reviewer: Let's be more prescriptive in our suggested behavior for v1.0 and older:

```suggestion
This optional parameter for incremental models specifies a field that can uniquely identify each row within your model. You can define `unique_key` in a configuration block at the top of your model. If your model doesn't contain a single field that is unique, but rather a combination of columns, we recommend that you create a single column that can serve as unique identifier (by concatenating and hashing those columns), and pass it into your model's configuration.
```

</VersionBlock>

<VersionBlock firstVersion="1.1">

This optional parameter for incremental models specifies a field (or combination of fields) that can uniquely identify each row within your model. You can define `unique_key` in a configuration block at the top of your model, and it can be a list in addition to a single column name.

> The `unique_key` should be supplied in your model definition as a string representing a simple column or a list of single quoted column names that can be used together, for example, `[‘col1, ‘col2’, …])`. We recommend you create a list of columns in your model.

Reviewer: Starting in v1.1, we can be less prescriptive, and use more neutral language, since both one column and multiple columns in combination work well. The thing to feel strongly about is the `:::tip` you called out below.
```suggestion
The `unique_key` should be supplied in your model definition as a string representing a simple column or a list of single quoted column names that can be used together, for example, `['col1', 'col2', …])`.
```

:::tip

> We recommend using universally supported syntax to avoid problems and adhere to the same standards. For example, we recommend you pass these columns as a list: `unique_key = ['user_id', 'session_number']` instead of an expression: `concat(user_id, session_number)`.

Reviewer: I agree with the first sentence; I'd prefer to situate it in the specific circumstance we're discussing
```suggestion
In cases where you need multiple columns in combination to uniquely identify each row, we recommend you pass these columns as a list (`unique_key = ['user_id', 'session_number']`), rather than a string expression (`unique_key = 'concat(user_id, session_number)'`).

By using the first syntax, which is more universal, dbt can ensure that the columns will be templated into your incremental model materialization in a way that's appropriate to your database.
```

Author: Thanks Jeremy! This context helps.

:::

</VersionBlock>

When using a `unique_key` for a given row in a `source` table:

* If all `unique_key` identified columns are present in the target table, an update procedure likely takes place, depending on the incremental strategy. For more information, see [About incremental_strategy](#about-incremental_strategy).

> * If any one of the `unique_key` columns in a source row does not find a matching target table row, the entire row is inserted into the target table.

Reviewer: This is close. The references "columns" and "rows" feel a bit confusing to me here. I think we should zoom this up to be at a _slightly_ higher conceptual level, now that we've developed the `unique_key` concept above
```
When a `unique_key` is defined, for each row of "new" data returned by your dbt model:
* If the same `unique_key` is present in in the "new" and "old" model data, dbt will update/replace the old row with the new row of data. The exact mechanics of that update/replace takes place will vary depending on your database and [incremental strategy](#about-incremental_strategy).
* If the `unique_key` is _not_ present in the "old" data, dbt will insert the entire row into the table.
```

Author: Addressed in this commit: https://github.com/dbt-labs/docs.getdbt.com/pull/1298/commits/838b1da8f9687ae35e6dfb09955c791052431fe1

:::info

> While common incremental strategies, such as`delete+insert` + `merge`, might use `unique_key`, others don't. For example, the `insert_overwrite` strategy does not use `unique_key`. For more information, see [About incremental_strategy](#about-incremental_strategy).

Reviewer: 👍 love this, I think we can give just a tiny bit more color:
```suggestion
While common incremental strategies, such as`delete+insert` + `merge`, might use `unique_key`, others don't. For example, the `insert_overwrite` strategy does not use `unique_key`, because it operates on partitions of data rather than individual rows. For more information, see [About incremental_strategy](#about-incremental_strategy).
```
